site/docs/Dynamic Programming/07 - Edit Distance.mdx, before:

---
description: With the given operations, minimize the number of operations to make 2 strings equal.
---

import VideoPlayer from '@site/src/components/utils/VideoPlayer';

<head> 
  <title>Edit Distance | Dynamic Programming</title>
</head>

## Problem

This is a classic problem of dynamic programming to match 2 strings given 
a set of operations.

### Problem Description

Given 2 strings $x = [x_1, x_2, ..., x_m]$ and $y = [y_1, y_2, ..., y_n]$ and a set of operations:

- Insert a character
- Delete a character
- Replace a character

Find the minimum number of operations to make $x$ and $y$ equal.

Given:
- `0 <= m, n`
    - `m = 0 => x = ""`
    - `n = 0 => y = ""`
- `x` and `y` consist of English letters and digits.

### Testcases

```testcase
Input: x = "horse", y = "ros"
Output: 3
```
The operations are:
1. horse -> rorse (replace 'h' with 'r')
2. rorse -> rose (delete 'r')
3. rose -> ros (delete 'e')

```testcase
Input: x = "intention", y = "execution"
Output: 5
```
The operations are:
1. intention -> inention (delete 't')
2. inention -> enention (replace 'i' with 'e')
3. enention -> exention (replace 'n' with 'x')
4. exention -> exection (replace 'n' with 'c')
5. exection -> execution (insert 'u')

---

## Solution

### Forming the Recurrence Relation

The subproblems depends on what operation we 
applied to the previous characters.

And apart from the 3 operations given, we must not
overlook the possibility of not applying any operation.

With this in mind, there are a total of 7 subproblems
when we are at $x_m$ and $y_n$:

- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, apply no operation.
- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_n$, insert a character in front of $y_n$ to match $x_{m-1}$.
- From $x_m$ and $y_{n-1}$, insert a character in front of $x_m$ to match $y_{n-1}$.
- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_n$, delete $x_{m-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $y_n$.
- From $x_m$ and $y_{n-1}$, delete $y_{n-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $x_m$.
- At $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, replace $x_{m-1}$ to match $y_{n-1}$.
- At $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, replace $y_{n-1}$ to match $x_{m-1}$.

But these are not what we are looking for. For example,
replacing $x_{m-1}$ to match $y_{n-1}$, and replacing
$y_{n-1}$ to match $x_{m-1}$ are actually the same.

Therefore, the actual subproblems are the following 3:

- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, either:
    - Apply no operation.
    - Replace one to match the other.
- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_n$, either:
    - Insert a character in front of $y_n$ to match $x_{m-1}$.
    - Delete $x_{m-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $y_n$.
- From $x_m$ and $y_{n-1}$, either:
    - Insert a character in front of $x_m$ to match $y_{n-1}$.
    - Delete $y_{n-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $x_m$.

:::info Match One String to The Other

Take a closer look at the subproblems, we can see that
in fact we can choose to always apply operations to only
one of the strings to match the others.

:::

The relation is a bit more complicated in this problem,
because we cannot apply no operation to the subproblem if 
$x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$ are not matched.

We have to find the minimum of the three operations if they are
not matching, and increase the operation count by 1.

As a result, let $f(m, n)$ be the minimum number of operations
to make $[x_1, x_2, ..., x_m]$ and $[y_1, y_2, ..., y_n]$ equal:

$$
f(m, n) = \begin{cases}

f(m - 1, n - 1) & \text{if } x_{m-1} = y_{n-1} \\

1 + \min \begin{cases}
f(m - 1, n) \\
f(m, n - 1) \\
f(m - 1, n - 1)
\end{cases} & \text{otherwise}

\end{cases}
$$

### Base Cases

The base case is simpiy when $x$ and $y$ are empty strings:

$$
f(0, 0) = 0
$$

### Edge Cases

The edge cases happen when one of the string is empty,
some of the recursive cases will be invalid.

In this case, we will either delete all of the extra 
characters of the non-empty string, or insert all of The
non-empty string's character to the empty string.

$$
\begin{aligned}
f(m, 0) &= m \\
f(0, n) &= n
\end{aligned}
$$

### Solving the Problem

We only need to implement the solution according to the 
recurrence relation.

```pseudocode title="Edit Distance"
function edit_distance(x: str, y: str) -> int {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.length
    let n = y.length

    // initialize memoization array
    let dp = [...] of size (m + 1, n + 1)
             zero-based index
    
    // calculate values
    for i from 0 to m {
        for j from 0 to n {
            dp[i][j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x[i - 1] == y[j - 1] => dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                (i, j) => 1 + min(
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    dp[i][j - 1],
                    dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[m][n]
}
```

Time complexity: $O(mn)$

Space complexity: $O(mn)$

***video***

import Dp07 from '@site/src/components/interactives/dp/dp_07';
import TextInput from '@site/src/components/utils/TextInput';

:::interactive Try it out

<Dp07>

$x =\:$

<TextInput />

, $y =\:$

<TextInput />

</Dp07>

:::

### Space Optimization

In comparison to the unique paths to corner problem,
which subproblems only consist of the top value
and the left value

This problem requires the top value, the left value,
and the top left value.

If we use the 1D array like the unique paths to
corner problem, the top left value will already
overwritten by the left value.

So the solution is to use another variable to store
the top value of current value for the right value
to as we move to the right.

```pseudocode title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
function edit_distance(x: str, y: str) -> int {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.length
    let n = y.length

    // initialize memoization array
    let dp = [...] of size n + 1
             zero-based index
             initialized to 0

    // top left variable
    let top_left = 0
    
    // calculate values
    for i from 0 to m {
        for j from 0 to n {
            // store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j]

            dp[j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x[i - 1] == y[j - 1] => top_left,
                (i, j) => 1 + min(
                    dp[j],
                    dp[j - 1],
                    top_left,
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[n]
}
```

Time complexity: $O(mn)$

Space complexity: $O(n)$

***video***

### Implementation

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

<Tabs>

<TabItem value='python' label='Python'>

```python title="Edit Distance"
def editDistance(x, y):
    # the problem sizes
    m = len(x)
    n = len(y)

    # initialize memoization array
    dp = [[0] * (n + 1) for _ in range(m + 1)]

    # calculate values
    for i in range(m + 1):
        for j in range(n + 1):
            if i == 0 and j == 0:
                # base case
                dp[i][j] = 0
            elif i == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[i][j] = j
            elif j == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[i][j] = i
            elif x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]:
                # recursive case
                dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j - 1]
            else:
                # recursive case
                dp[i][j] = 1 + min(
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    dp[i][j - 1],
                    dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                )

    return dp[m][n]
```

```python title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
def editDistance(x, y):
    # the problem sizes
    m = len(x)
    n = len(y)

    # initialize memoization array
    dp = [0] * (n + 1)

    # top left variable
    top_left = 0

    # calculate values
    for i in range(m + 1):
        for j in range(n + 1):
            # store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j]

            if i == 0 and j == 0:
                # base case
                dp[j] = 0
            elif i == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[j] = j
            elif j == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[j] = i
            elif x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]:
                # recursive case
                dp[j] = top_left
            else:
                # recursive case
                dp[j] = 1 + min(
                    dp[j],
                    dp[j - 1],
                    top_left,
                )

    return dp[n]
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='cpp' label='C++'>

```cpp title="Edit Distance"
int edit_distance(const std::string& x, const std::string& y) {
    // the problem sizes
    std::size_t m = x.size();
    std::size_t n = y.size();

    // initialize memoization array
    std::vector<std::vector<int>> dp = std::vector<std::vector<int>>(m + 1, std::vector<int>(n + 1, 0));

    // calculate values
    for (std::size_t i = 0; i <= m; ++i) {
        for (std::size_t j = 0; j <= n; ++j) {
            if (i == 0 && j == 0) {
                // base case
                dp[i][j] = 0;
            } else if (i == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[i][j] = j;
            } else if (j == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[i][j] = i;
            } else if (x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]) {
                // recursive case
                dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j - 1];
            } else {
                // recursive case
                dp[i][j] = 1 + std::min({
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    dp[i][j - 1],
                    dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                });
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[m][n];
}
```

```cpp title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
int edit_distance(const std::string& x, const std::string& y) {
    // the problem sizes
    std::size_t m = x.size();
    std::size_t n = y.size();

    // initialize memoization array
    std::vector<int> dp = std::vector<int>(n + 1, 0);

    // top left variable
    int top_left = 0;

    // calculate values
    for (std::size_t i = 0; i <= m; ++i) {
        for (std::size_t j = 0; j <= n; ++j) {
            // store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j];

            if (i == 0 && j == 0) {
                // base case
                dp[j] = 0;
            } else if (i == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[j] = j;
            } else if (j == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[j] = i;
            } else if (x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]) {
                // recursive case
                dp[j] = top_left;
            } else {
                // recursive case
                dp[j] = 1 + std::min({
                    dp[j],
                    dp[j - 1],
                    top_left,
                });
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[n];
}
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='rust' label='Rust'>

```rust title="Edit Distance"
fn edit_distance(x: &str, y: &str) -> usize {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.len();
    let n = y.len();

    // initialize memoization array
    let mut dp = vec![vec![0; n + 1]; m + 1];

    // calculate values
    for i in 0..=m {
        for j in 0..=n {
            dp[i][j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x.as_bytes()[i - 1] == y.as_bytes()[j - 1] => dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                (i, j) => 1 + std::cmp::min(
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    std::cmp::min(
                        dp[i][j - 1],
                        dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                    ),
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    dp[m][n]
}
```

```rust title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
fn edit_distance(x: &str, y: &str) -> usize {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.len();
    let n = y.len();

    // initialize memoization array
    let mut dp = vec![0; n + 1];

    // top left variable
    let mut top_left = 0;

    // calculate values
    for i in 0..=m {
        for j in 0..=n {
            // store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j];

            dp[j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x.as_bytes()[i - 1] == y.as_bytes()[j - 1] => top_left,
                (i, j) => 1 + std::cmp::min(
                    dp[j],
                    std::cmp::min(
                        dp[j - 1],
                        top_left,
                    ),
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    dp[n]
}
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

---

## Related Topics

LeetCode - Edit Distance: https://leetcode.com/problems/edit-distance/

Commit message:

Add multiple choices and improve tables

site/docs/Dynamic Programming/07 - Edit Distance.mdx, after:

---
description: With the given operations, minimize the number of operations to make 2 strings equal.
---

import VideoPlayer from '@site/src/components/utils/VideoPlayer';

<head> 
  <title>Edit Distance | Dynamic Programming</title>
</head>

## Problem

This is a classic problem of dynamic programming to match 2 strings given 
a set of operations.

### Problem Description

Given 2 strings $x = [x_1, x_2, ..., x_m]$ and $y = [y_1, y_2, ..., y_n]$ and a set of operations:

- Insert a character
- Delete a character
- Replace a character

Find the minimum number of operations to make $x$ and $y$ equal.

Given:
- `0 <= m, n`
    - `m = 0 => x = ""`
    - `n = 0 => y = ""`
- `x` and `y` consist of English letters and digits.

### Testcases

```testcase
Input: x = "horse", y = "ros"
Output: 3
```
The operations are:
1. horse -> rorse (replace 'h' with 'r')
2. rorse -> rose (delete 'r')
3. rose -> ros (delete 'e')

```testcase
Input: x = "intention", y = "execution"
Output: 5
```
The operations are:
1. intention -> inention (delete 't')
2. inention -> enention (replace 'i' with 'e')
3. enention -> exention (replace 'n' with 'x')
4. exention -> exection (replace 'n' with 'c')
5. exection -> execution (insert 'u')

---

## Solution

### Forming the Recurrence Relation

The subproblems depends on what operation we 
applied to the previous characters.

And apart from the 3 operations given, we must not
overlook the possibility of not applying any operation.

With this in mind, there are a total of 7 subproblems
when we are at $x_m$ and $y_n$:

- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, apply no operation.
- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_n$, insert a character in front of $y_n$ to match $x_{m-1}$.
- From $x_m$ and $y_{n-1}$, insert a character in front of $x_m$ to match $y_{n-1}$.
- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_n$, delete $x_{m-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $y_n$.
- From $x_m$ and $y_{n-1}$, delete $y_{n-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $x_m$.
- At $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, replace $x_{m-1}$ to match $y_{n-1}$.
- At $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, replace $y_{n-1}$ to match $x_{m-1}$.

But these are not what we are looking for. For example,
replacing $x_{m-1}$ to match $y_{n-1}$, and replacing
$y_{n-1}$ to match $x_{m-1}$ are actually the same.

Therefore, the actual subproblems are the following 3:

- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$, either:
    - Apply no operation.
    - Replace one to match the other.
- From $x_{m-1}$ and $y_n$, either:
    - Insert a character in front of $y_n$ to match $x_{m-1}$.
    - Delete $x_{m-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $y_n$.
- From $x_m$ and $y_{n-1}$, either:
    - Insert a character in front of $x_m$ to match $y_{n-1}$.
    - Delete $y_{n-1}$ to avoid mismatch with $x_m$.

:::info Match One String to The Other

Take a closer look at the subproblems, we can see that
in fact we can choose to always apply operations to only
one of the strings to match the others.

:::

The relation is a bit more complicated in this problem,
because we cannot apply no operation to the subproblem if 
$x_{m-1}$ and $y_{n-1}$ are not matched.

We have to find the minimum of the three operations if they are
not matching, and increase the operation count by 1.

As a result, let $f(m, n)$ be the minimum number of operations
to make $[x_1, x_2, ..., x_m]$ and $[y_1, y_2, ..., y_n]$ equal:

$$
f(m, n) = \begin{cases}

f(m - 1, n - 1) & \text{if } x_{m-1} = y_{n-1} \\

1 + \min \begin{cases}
f(m - 1, n) \\
f(m, n - 1) \\
f(m - 1, n - 1)
\end{cases} & \text{otherwise}

\end{cases}
$$

### Base Cases

The base case is simpiy when $x$ and $y$ are empty strings:

$$
f(0, 0) = 0
$$

### Edge Cases

The edge cases happen when one of the string is empty,
some of the recursive cases will be invalid.

In this case, we will either delete all of the extra 
characters of the non-empty string, or insert all of The
non-empty string's character to the empty string.

$$
\begin{aligned}
f(m, 0) &= m \\
f(0, n) &= n
\end{aligned}
$$

### Solving the Problem

We only need to implement the solution according to the 
recurrence relation.

```pseudocode title="Edit Distance"
function edit_distance(x: str, y: str) -> int {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.length
    let n = y.length

    // initialize memoization array
    let dp = [...] of size (m + 1, n + 1)
             zero-based index
    
    // calculate values
    for i from 0 to m {
        for j from 0 to n {
            dp[i][j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x[i - 1] == y[j - 1] => dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                (i, j) => 1 + min(
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    dp[i][j - 1],
                    dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[m][n]
}
```

Time complexity: $O(mn)$

Space complexity: $O(mn)$

***video***

import Dp07 from '@site/src/components/interactives/dp/dp_07';
import TextInput from '@site/src/components/utils/TextInput';

:::interactive Try it out

<Dp07>

$x =\:$

<TextInput />

, $y =\:$

<TextInput />

</Dp07>

:::

### Space Optimization

In comparison to the unique paths to corner problem,
which subproblems only consist of the top value
and the left value

This problem requires the top value, the left value,
and the top left value.

If we use the 1D array like the unique paths to
corner problem, the top left value will already
overwritten by the left value.

So the solution is to use another variable to store
the top value of current value for the right value
to as we move to the right.

```pseudocode title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
function edit_distance(x: str, y: str) -> int {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.length
    let n = y.length

    // initialize memoization array
    let dp = [...] of size n + 1
             zero-based index
             initialized to 0

    // top left variable
    let top_left = 0
    
    // calculate values
    for i from 0 to m {
        for j from 0 to n {
            // store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j]

            dp[j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x[i - 1] == y[j - 1] => top_left,
                (i, j) => 1 + min(
                    dp[j],
                    dp[j - 1],
                    top_left,
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[n]
}
```

Time complexity: $O(mn)$

Space complexity: $O(n)$

***video***

import MultipleChoice from '@site/src/components/utils/MultipleChoice';

:::interactive Checkpoint

<MultipleChoice
    options={[
        'If there are n strings, the time complexity and space comlpexity will remain the same',
        'There are 7 subproblems',
        'There can be multiple solutions to the same problem',
        'Both strings have to be editable to solve the problem'
    ]}
    answer={2}
    explanation='
        There can be multiple solution for one edit distance problem,
        as long as the number of operations are the same and it follows
        the rules of the operations. For n strings, the time complexity
        and space complexity will be multiplied by length of each string.
        Only one of the strings need to be editable to solve the problem.
    '>

Which of the following statements are true about the edit distance problem?

</MultipleChoice>

:::

### Implementation

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

<Tabs>

<TabItem value='python' label='Python'>

```python title="Edit Distance"
def editDistance(x, y):
    # the problem sizes
    m = len(x)
    n = len(y)

    # initialize memoization array
    dp = [[0] * (n + 1) for _ in range(m + 1)]

    # calculate values
    for i in range(m + 1):
        for j in range(n + 1):
            if i == 0 and j == 0:
                # base case
                dp[i][j] = 0
            elif i == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[i][j] = j
            elif j == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[i][j] = i
            elif x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]:
                # recursive case
                dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j - 1]
            else:
                # recursive case
                dp[i][j] = 1 + min(
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    dp[i][j - 1],
                    dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                )

    return dp[m][n]
```

```python title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
def editDistance(x, y):
    # the problem sizes
    m = len(x)
    n = len(y)

    # initialize memoization array
    dp = [0] * (n + 1)

    # top left variable
    top_left = 0

    # calculate values
    for i in range(m + 1):
        for j in range(n + 1):
            # store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j]

            if i == 0 and j == 0:
                # base case
                dp[j] = 0
            elif i == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[j] = j
            elif j == 0:
                # edge case
                dp[j] = i
            elif x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]:
                # recursive case
                dp[j] = top_left
            else:
                # recursive case
                dp[j] = 1 + min(
                    dp[j],
                    dp[j - 1],
                    top_left,
                )

    return dp[n]
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='cpp' label='C++'>

```cpp title="Edit Distance"
int edit_distance(const std::string& x, const std::string& y) {
    // the problem sizes
    std::size_t m = x.size();
    std::size_t n = y.size();

    // initialize memoization array
    std::vector<std::vector<int>> dp = std::vector<std::vector<int>>(m + 1, std::vector<int>(n + 1, 0));

    // calculate values
    for (std::size_t i = 0; i <= m; ++i) {
        for (std::size_t j = 0; j <= n; ++j) {
            if (i == 0 && j == 0) {
                // base case
                dp[i][j] = 0;
            } else if (i == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[i][j] = j;
            } else if (j == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[i][j] = i;
            } else if (x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]) {
                // recursive case
                dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j - 1];
            } else {
                // recursive case
                dp[i][j] = 1 + std::min({
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    dp[i][j - 1],
                    dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                });
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[m][n];
}
```

```cpp title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
int edit_distance(const std::string& x, const std::string& y) {
    // the problem sizes
    std::size_t m = x.size();
    std::size_t n = y.size();

    // initialize memoization array
    std::vector<int> dp = std::vector<int>(n + 1, 0);

    // top left variable
    int top_left = 0;

    // calculate values
    for (std::size_t i = 0; i <= m; ++i) {
        for (std::size_t j = 0; j <= n; ++j) {
            // store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j];

            if (i == 0 && j == 0) {
                // base case
                dp[j] = 0;
            } else if (i == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[j] = j;
            } else if (j == 0) {
                // edge case
                dp[j] = i;
            } else if (x[i - 1] == y[j - 1]) {
                // recursive case
                dp[j] = top_left;
            } else {
                // recursive case
                dp[j] = 1 + std::min({
                    dp[j],
                    dp[j - 1],
                    top_left,
                });
            }
        }
    }

    return dp[n];
}
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='rust' label='Rust'>

```rust title="Edit Distance"
fn edit_distance(x: &str, y: &str) -> usize {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.len();
    let n = y.len();

    // initialize memoization array
    let mut dp = vec![vec![0; n + 1]; m + 1];

    // calculate values
    for i in 0..=m {
        for j in 0..=n {
            dp[i][j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x.as_bytes()[i - 1] == y.as_bytes()[j - 1] => dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                (i, j) => 1 + std::cmp::min(
                    dp[i - 1][j],
                    std::cmp::min(
                        dp[i][j - 1],
                        dp[i - 1][j - 1],
                    ),
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    dp[m][n]
}
```

```rust title="Edit Distance - Space Optimized"
fn edit_distance(x: &str, y: &str) -> usize {
    // the problem sizes
    let m = x.len();
    let n = y.len();

    // initialize memoization array
    let mut dp = vec![0; n + 1];

    // top left variable
    let mut top_left = 0;

    // calculate values
    for i in 0..=m {
        for j in 0..=n {
            // store the top left value
            top_left = dp[j];

            dp[j] = match (i, j) {
                // base case
                (0, 0) => 0,

                // edge cases
                (0, j) => j,
                (i, 0) => i,

                // recursive cases
                (i, j) if x.as_bytes()[i - 1] == y.as_bytes()[j - 1] => top_left,
                (i, j) => 1 + std::cmp::min(
                    dp[j],
                    std::cmp::min(
                        dp[j - 1],
                        top_left,
                    ),
                ),
            }
        }
    }

    dp[n]
}
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

---

## Related Topics

LeetCode - Edit Distance: https://leetcode.com/problems/edit-distance/
